---
layout: post
title:  "The Land of Chimeras"
date:   2021-04-02 13:04:00 -0300
categories: stories
author: Machado de Assis
excerpt: The Land of Chimeras, a 1862 short story by Machado de Assis, never before published in English, about what might not be exactly a flight of fancy
featured-image: /assets/posts/image_chimeras.png
featured-image-alt: A sleeping dog, upon which descends two winged feet and the brim of an ethereal garment

---

<div style="text-align: right">Written by Machado de Assis<br/>
Edited by Iana Araújo<br/>
Translated by Vanessa Guedes<br/>
Copyedited by Natalle Moura<br/>
Proofread by Lucas Rafael Ferraz</div>
<br/>

Cato re­gret­ted go­ing by sea a couple of times when he could have gone by land. The vir­tu­ous Ro­man was right. Am­phitrite’s af­fec­tions are vi­ol­ent, some­times even dread­ful. The deeds on the sea doubled in value be­cause of this cir­cum­stance. And it is also be­cause of it that pla­cid souls avoid sail­ing or, to speak more ad­equately, those of prudent and safe spir­its.

But to ex­plain the pro­verb that says: the work rises un­der­neath the feet — go­ing by land is not ab­so­lutely safer than by sea, and the story of the iron tracks, how­ever small, tells more than a few sad epis­odes.

Ab­sorbed in these and other re­flec­tions was my friend Titus, poet at twenty, no money and no mous­tache, seated at the rot­ten work desk where a candle glowed si­lently.

I must move for­ward to the phys­ical and moral por­trait of my friend Titus.

Titus is not tall or short, which means that he is of me­dium height. Frankly, such height could be called el­eg­ant in my opin­ion. Hav­ing an an­gelic face, sweet and deep eyes, his nose a dir­ect and le­git des­cend­ant of Al­cibi­ades, a gra­cious mouth, and wide fore­head as the lair of thoughts, Titus could serve as a model to the arts and as a be­loved ob­ject to the fif­teen or even twenty-year-old sweet­hearts.

Like medals, and like all things in this world of bal­ance, Titus has an­other side. Oh! Such a sad thing is the other side of the medals! Be­ing a model to the arts from the waist up, Titus is a pi­ti­ful per­son when it comes to the rest. Won­der­fully crooked feet, bow­legged, such are the cons that my friend’s per­son of­fers to those who are thrilled by the mag­ni­fi­cent pros of the face and the head. It seems that nature had di­vided it­self to give Titus the best and the worst of it and put him in the miser­able and dis­con­sol­ate plight of the pea­cock, who ad­orns it­self and con­tem­plates ra­di­antly, but whose pride is knocked down and fades away when it looks at its legs and feet.

In his mor­als, Titus presents the same doubled as­pect from the phys­ical. He has no ad­dic­tions but pos­sesses weak­nesses of char­ac­ter which some­what break the vir­tues that oth­er­wise dig­ni­fied him. He is good and has the evan­gel­ical vir­tue of char­ity; he knows, like the di­vine Mas­ter, to break the bread of sub­sist­ence and feed the hungry with the true joy of con­science and heart. Moreover, it is not re­por­ted that he would ever harm the most im­per­tin­ent an­imal, or the most in­solent man, two identical things, in the short days of his life. On the con­trary, it is said that his pity and good in­stincts once led him to be al­most crushed while try­ing to save a mon­grel who was sleep­ing in the street and al­most got run over by a car. The mon­grel saved by Titus be­came so fond of him that she never left his side. At the mo­ment we are see­ing him ab­sorbed in vague thoughts, she is ly­ing on the table, ser­i­ous and severe, con­tem­plat­ing him.

In Titus, we must only re­proach the weak­nesses of char­ac­ter, and we must be­lieve that they really are the chil­dren of his vir­tues. Titus used to sell the pro­duc­tions of his muse, not by a le­git­im­ate ex­change of books and money, but by dis­hon­or­able means, un­worthy of a son of Apollo. His sales were ab­so­lute, that is to say that by ex­chan­ging his verses for money, the poet lost the right of pa­tern­ity over the pro­duc­tions. He had only one cus­tomer: a rich fel­low, ob­sessed with be­com­ing fam­ous as a poet, and know­ing how easy it was for Titus to rhyme, in­tro­duced him­self one day at the poet’s mod­est inn and began to ne­go­ti­ate on these terms:

“My dear, I come to of­fer you a bar­gain…”

“Tell me,” Titus answered.

“I have heard that you write po­etry... is it true?”

Titus held back with some ef­fort after the homely ap­proach but answered. “It is true.”

“Very well. I of­fer you the fol­low­ing: I shall buy all your verses for a good price. Not the ones already writ­ten, but the ones you will write from now on, un­der the con­di­tion that I shall print them as a product of my own work. I im­pose no other con­di­tions to the busi­ness: I warn you, how­ever, that I prefer odes and poems about feel­ings. Deal?”

When the man fin­ished, Titus stood up and waved him out. The man sensed that if he did not leave soon, things might end badly. He left, grat­ing his teeth. “You’ll still look for me, let it be!”

On the day after, my poet had already for­got­ten the ad­ven­ture of the pre­vi­ous day, but the days passed by and the ur­gent needs presen­ted them­selves at the door with a beg­ging look and threat­en­ing hands. He had no re­sources and after a troubled night, he re­membered the gen­tle­man and tried to find him. He told the man who he was and that he was will­ing to ac­cept the deal. The man, laugh­ing diabol­ic­ally, made the first pay­ment in ad­vance, on the con­di­tion that on the next day the poet would give him an ode to the Pol­ish. Titus spent the night en­list­ing words with no idea, such was his con­di­tion, and the next day he brought the work to his cus­tomer, who thought it was good and had the cour­tesy to shake his hand.

Such is the moral side of Titus. The vir­tue of be­ing a good payer led him to sell the gifts of God, and yet we see that he res­isted, and was only over­come when he found him­self with the rope around his neck.

The table where Titus was lean­ing on was an aged thing, old-fash­ioned, and hand­made. He had in­her­ited it from an aunt who had died ten years ago. An ink­well made of bone, a bird feather, some pa­per, those are Titus’ work­ing tools. Two chairs and a bed com­pleted his fur­niture set. I’ve already men­tioned the candle and the mon­grel.

The time that Titus en­gulfed him­self in re­flec­tions and fantas­ies was late at night. The rain fell vi­ol­ently, and the light­ning that broke the sky from in­stant to in­stant let us see the ho­ri­zon filled with swollen black clouds. Titus saw noth­ing at all, be­cause his head res­ted on his arms, and they were on the table; and he prob­ably wasn’t even listen­ing, be­cause he was en­ter­tained by the dangers offered by the dif­fer­ent means of travel.

But what was the reason for these thoughts in which the poet was en­gulfed in? That is what I will ex­plain to the le­git­im­ate curi­os­ity of the read­ers. Titus, like all men in their twen­ties, po­ets and not po­ets alike, felt ill by the dis­ease of love. A pair of black eyes, an el­eg­ant gait, a sight, a heav­enly creature, any­thing of the sort, had in­flu­enced Titus’ heart in such a way that it had placed him, one might say, with one foot in the grave. Titus’ love began with a fever. He was bedrid­den for three days and was cured (of the fever, not the love) by an old lady in the neigh­bor­hood, who knew the secret of vir­tu­ous plants, and who put my poet on his feet, which made her ac­quire one more title to the repu­ta­tion of a sor­ceress, of which her mi­ra­cu­lous con­coc­tions had earned her.

After the acute period of the dis­ease, it re­mained in­side him this residue of love which, des­pite its calm and gentle nature, loses noth­ing of its in­tens­ity. Titus was ar­dently in love, and since then he began to de­fraud some of his cus­tomer’s odes, sub­tract­ing some in­flamed stan­zas, which he ded­ic­ated to the ob­ject of his in­ner­most thoughts, just like that sieur d’Ofayel, of loyal and coy love, with whom he re­sembled, not in the sen­sa­tion of verses, but in ro­mantic mis­for­tune.

The frus­trated love, when it doesn’t lead to sub­lime dis­dain from the heart, leads to tragedy or fool­ish­ness. It was in the lat­ter al­tern­at­ive that the spirit of my poet floundered. After spend­ing the muses’ Latin in vain, he ven­tured an oral state­ment to the lady of his thoughts. She listened to him with a harsh soul, and when he had just spoken, she told him that it was bet­ter to re­turn to real life, leave muses and loves, and care for his own groom­ing. Do not as­sume, reader, that the lady of whom I speak of had a life as cas­ual as her lan­guage. On the con­trary, she was a model of the most ser­aphic pur­ity and of the most per­fect mod­esty of cus­toms. She had re­ceived the aus­tere edu­ca­tion of her father, an old mil­it­ary cap­tain, a man of in­cred­ible good faith, who still be­lieved in two things in this mis­placed cen­tury: the polit­ical pro­grams and the onions of Egypt.

Dis­il­lu­sioned at once of his pre­ten­sions, Titus did not have the strength to wipe the army man’s daugh­ter away from his memory; and the girl’s raw and mer­ci­less re­sponse was stuck in his heart like a pen­et­rat­ing cold dag­ger. He tried to tear it out, but the memory was al­ways alive, like the al­tar of Vesta, brought him the fatal words in the middle of the hap­pi­est or less sad hours of his life, as a warn­ing that his sat­is­fac­tion couldn’t last, and that sad­ness was the real back­ground of his days. That was why the an­cient Egyp­tians ordered to have a sar­co­phagus in the middle of a feast, as a re­minder that life is trans­it­ory, and that only in the grave one can find the great and eternal truth.

After com­ing to his senses, when Titus suc­ceeded in com­bin­ing two ideas to­gether and draw­ing a con­sequence from them, two pro­jects were presen­ted to him, which was more ap­pro­pri­ate to win the faint­hearted vil­lainy. One, con­cluded by tragedy, the other, by fool­ish­ness, which is a sad al­tern­at­ive for the mis­un­der­stood of the heart! The first of these pro­jects was simply to leave this world; the other was lim­ited to a jour­ney that the poet would make by sea or land in or­der to leave the cap­ital for a while. The poet was already abandon­ing the first for find­ing it too bloody and too per­man­ent. The second seemed bet­ter to him, more in keep­ing with his dig­nity and, above all, with his in­stincts of self-pre­ser­va­tion. But what is the way to re­lo­cate? Would he go by land? By sea? Each op­tion had its draw­backs. The poet was im­mersed in these in­quir­ies when he heard three knocks on the door. Who would it be? Who would go look­ing for the poet at that late hour? He re­membered he had some de­liv­er­ies for the man of the odes and went to open the door, will­ing to listen in resig­na­tion to the very plaus­ible ser­mon that he would nat­ur­ally preach. But, oh awe! As soon as the poet opened the door, be­hold! A sylph, a ce­les­tial creature, dia­phan­ous, fant­astic, dressed in ivory robes, neither cloth nor mist, some­thing in-between, of swift feet, with a se­rene and in­sinu­at­ing face, black and spark­ling eyes, blond curls of the light­est and most del­ic­ate hair which fell grace­fully on bare shoulders, di­vine shoulders, like yours, oh Aph­rod­ite! Be­hold, such a creature! She in­vades the poet’s cham­ber and, of­fer­ing her hand, com­mands him to close the door and take a seat at the table.

Titus was scared. He mech­an­ic­ally re­turned to his place without tak­ing his eyes off of her. She sat in front of him and began to play with the dog, who showed rare con­tent­ment. Ten minutes passed like this; then, the sin­gu­lar pil­grim, set­ting her eyes on the poet’s, asked him with a sweet voice, never heard be­fore:

“What are you think­ing of, poet? Are you mourn­ing some ill-fated love? Do you suf­fer from the in­justice of men? Does the mis­for­tune of oth­ers hurt you, or is it your own which shad­ows your face?”

This in­quiry was made so in­sinu­at­ingly that Titus answered im­me­di­ately, without ques­tion­ing the reason for her curi­os­ity:

“I think of God’s in­justice.”

“The ex­pres­sion is con­tra­dict­ory; God is justice.”

“No, He is not. If He were, He would have equally shared ten­der­ness among the hearts and would not al­low one to burn use­lessly for an­other. The phe­nomenon of sym­pathy should al­ways be re­cip­rocal so that one could not look coldly at an­other when the other raised lov­ing eyes to­wards her.”

“It is not you who speaks, poet. It is your self-love, wounded by the bad pay­off of your af­fec­tions. But do the muses serve you well? Enter the sanc­tu­ary of po­etry, en­gulf your­self in the bosom of in­spir­a­tion. There you will for­get the pain­ful wound that the world has opened in you.”

“Poor me,” replied the poet, “who has such cold po­etry, and erased in­spir­a­tion!”

“What do you need for bring­ing po­etry and in­spir­a­tion to life?”

“I need what I lack... and I lack everything.”

“Everything? You’re over­re­act­ing. You have God’s seal that has dis­tin­guished you from other men, and that is enough for you. Were you con­tem­plat­ing leav­ing this earth?”

“It is true.”

“Well, I come for this pur­pose. Do you want to go with me?”

“Where?”

“Who cares? Do you want to come?”

“Yes, I do. Then I’ll be dis­trac­ted. We’ll leave to­mor­row. Is it by sea, or by land?”

“Not to­mor­row, nor by sea or land; but today, and by air.”

Titus stood up and took a step back. The sight that was the sylph stood up too. “Are you afraid?”, she asked.

“Afraid, no, but...”

“Let us go. We’ll make a de­light­ful trip.”

“Let’s go.”

I do not know if Titus was ex­pect­ing a hot air bal­loon for the air trip that the un­ex­pec­ted visit in­vited him to; but what is cer­tain is that his eyes widened prodi­giously when he saw two long, white wings open­ing from her shoulder blades which she began to stir while golden dust fell from it.

“Come on,” said the vis­ion.

“Come on!” Titus re­peated, mech­an­ic­ally.

She took him in her arms and went up with him to the ceil­ing, which ripped open, and they both went through it, vis­ion and poet. The storm had ceased as if by ma­gic. The sky was clean, trans­par­ent, bright, truly heav­enly, at last. The stars were shin­ing their best light, and a po­etic white moon­light fell over the rooftops and on the wild­flowers and grass of the fields.

The two went up.

The as­cen­sion las­ted some time. Titus could not think; he was stunned and go­ing up without know­ing where, nor the reason why. He felt that the wind was stir­ring the blond hair of the sylph and that they were beat­ing him sweetly in the face, res­ult­ing in a ce­les­tial ex­hal­a­tion that in­ebri­ated him and made him numb. The air was pure and fresh. Titus, who had been dis­trac­ted for some time from the oc­cu­pa­tion of the muses in the study of phys­ical laws, said that in that con­tinu­ous up­rise they would soon feel the ef­fects of the at­mo­sphere’s rar­efac­tion. He was mis­taken! They al­ways went up, and a lot, but the at­mo­sphere was al­ways the same, and the more he as­cen­ded the bet­ter he could breathe.

This went quickly through the poet’s mind. As I said, he did not think; he went up without look­ing at the earth. And what would he look down for? The vis­ion could only lead him to the heav­ens.

Soon Titus began to see the plan­ets one by one. It was about dawn. Venus, paler and blon­der than usual, over­shad­owed the stars with its bright­ness and beauty. Titus looked in won­der at the morn­ing god­dess. But they went up, they al­ways went up. The plan­ets passed by the poet’s sides as if they were rampant steeds. Even­tu­ally, they were in a re­gion en­tirely dif­fer­ent from the ones they had crossed on that as­ton­ish­ing jour­ney. Titus felt his soul ex­pand­ing in the new at­mo­sphere. Was that heaven? The poet did not dare ask and kept si­lent, wait­ing for the end of the jour­ney. As they pen­et­rated that re­gion, the poet’s soul burst into joy. Then, they entered a planet; the fairy de­pos­ited the poet on the ground and they kept go­ing by foot.

While walk­ing, the ob­jects star­ted tak­ing the form of real things. Un­til then, they had been vis­ible only through a fog. Titus could then see that he was in a new land that, in all re­spects, was odd: the first as­pect won over what the po­etic Istan­bul or po­etic Naples of­fer. How­ever, the more they got in, the more the ob­jects took a real as­pect. Thus, they ar­rived at the great square where the palaces were built. The royal house was, so to speak, a com­pil­a­tion of all the ar­chi­tec­tural or­ders, in­clud­ing the Chinese, and it should be noted that this one made a great ex­pense in the struc­ture of the palace.

Titus wanted to free him­self from the eager­ness he felt to find out in what coun­try he had just entered, and so he posed the ques­tion to his part­ner.

“We are in the land of Chi­meras,” she answered.

“In the land of Chi­meras?”

“The Chi­meras. A coun­try where three-quar­ters of hu­man­ity travels to, but which is not en­shrined in the boards of sci­ence.”

Titus settled with the ex­plan­a­tion. But he wondered about the case. Why would he had gone there? To where was he be­ing taken to? He thought of that when the fairy let him know that they were get­ting to the palace door. In the ves­ti­bule there were about twenty or thirty sol­diers who smoked thick sea foam pipes, and who got drunk with so many other padishahs, con­tem­plat­ing the blue and white smoke balls that came out of their mouths. A mil­it­ary sa­lute happened upon the en­trance of the two vis­it­ors. They climbed the great stair­case and went to the up­per floors.

“Let’s talk to the mon­archs,” said the poet’s com­pan­ion. They crossed many rooms and gal­ler­ies. All the walls, as in Dinis’ poem, were lined with sil­ver wall­pa­per and se­quins.

They entered the great room. The genius of trifles, the one that Elp­ino talks about, was seated on a throne made of laminated silver foil, hav­ing as or­na­ment two pea­cocks, one on each side. The mon­arch him­self had a liv­ing pea­cock as a hat, tied by the feet to a kind of zuc­chetto, lar­ger than those of our priests, which stood tied to the head by two wide yel­low rib­bons, tied un­der the royal jaw. An identical hat ad­orned the head of the geni­uses of the court, who cor­res­pon­ded to the vis­counts of this world and who sur­roun­ded the throne of the bril­liant king. All those pea­cocks, from minute to minute, opened them­selves wide and gave the usual screams.

When Titus entered the great room by the hand of the sylph, there was a mur­mur among the Chi­mer­ical no­ble­men. The vis­ion de­clared that she was go­ing to present a son of the earth. The ce­re­mony of in­tro­duc­tions fol­lowed, which was a thread of cour­tes­ies, pas­sages, and other Chi­mer­ical things, without ex­clud­ing the form­al­ity of hand-kiss­ing. Do not think that Titus was the only one to kiss the hand of the mon­arch genius; all those present did the same, be­cause ac­cord­ing to what Titus later heard, the most in­sig­ni­fic­ant act does not take place in that coun­try without this form­al­ity be­ing ful­filled.

After the in­tro­duc­tions ce­re­mony, the mon­arch asked the poet what role he had on earth, to give him the cor­res­pond­ing cicer­one.

“I have, if as much, a sad due,” said Titus.

“Is that all? If so, you will have the dis­pleas­ure of be­ing ac­com­pan­ied by the com­mon cicer­one. We have here the No­bil­ity, the Ex­cel­lency, the Great­ness, and some more. But, as for Due, hav­ing in­hab­ited this coun­try for some time, it has be­come so un­help­ful that I thought it bet­ter to fire them.”

At this time, No­bil­ity and Ex­cel­lency, two prissy creatures who had ap­proached the poet, turned their backs on him, shrug­ging their shoulders and lay­ing the greatest dis­dain­ful look on him.

Titus wanted to ask his com­pan­ion the reason for this; but the vis­ion pulled him by the arm, and, with a ges­ture, made him pay at­ten­tion to the Genius of Trifles, whose eye­brows con­trac­ted like the an­cient po­ets said that those of Jupiter Ton­ans con­trac­ted.

At this mo­ment, a flock of fresh, happy, beau­ti­ful, blond young girls came in... oh! but a blond­ness that is un­known by us, the chil­dren of the earth! They came run­ning in, with the agil­ity of fly­ing swal­lows; and after shak­ing hands with the court geni­uses, they went to the mon­arch Genius, in front of whom they did ten or twelve curt­sies.

Who were those girls? My poet was open-mouthed. He asked his guide and learned. They were the Uto­pias and the Chi­meras who came from the earth, where they had spent the night in the com­pany of some men and wo­men of all ages and con­di­tions.

The Uto­pias and Chi­meras were cel­eb­rated by the mon­arch, who deigned to smile at them and touch them in their faces. Cheer­ful and laugh­ing, they re­ceived the royal af­fec­tion as some­thing that was owed to them. After ten or twelve curt­sies — a re­pe­ti­tion of the pre­vi­ous ones — they left the room, but not without hug­ging or pinch­ing my poet, who looked at them in amazement without know­ing why he had be­come the ob­ject of such jo­vi­al­ity. His amazement grew when he heard from each one of them an ex­pres­sion very of­ten used in mas­quer­ade dances: I know you!

After they all left, the Genius made a sign, and all his at­ten­tion was fo­cused on the mon­arch, watch­ful of what was about to come out of his lips. The ex­pect­a­tion was cut short, be­cause the gra­cious mon­arch, with only one ges­ture, in­dic­ated to the com­mon cicer­one the miser­able guest. The outro ce­re­mony con­tin­ued, which las­ted long minutes be­cause of the curt­sies, gal­lantries, and hand-kiss­ings.

The three of them, the poet, the lead­ing fairy, and the cicer­one, passed to the queen’s room. The royal lady was a per­son worthy of at­ten­tion in all re­spects; she was im­pos­ing and grace­ful; she wore a gauzy dress and clothes from the same fab­ric, laced-up shoes with ivory satin, fine stones of all kinds and col­ors on her arms, neck, and head; her del­ic­ate face was of such art that she seemed to have been colored by nature’s brush. From her hair, one could smell fra­grant cos­metic act­ives and del­ic­ate oils.

Titus did not hide the strong im­pres­sion that she pro­voked in him. He turned to his travel com­pan­ion and asked what her name was.

“Don't you see?” the fairy answered. “Don’t you see the three hun­dred dam­sels who work around her? Well then? She’s Fash­ion, sur­roun­ded by her three hun­dred beau­ti­ful, ca­pri­cious daugh­ters.”

From these words, Titus re­membered the _His­sope_. He had no doubts that he was in the land of the Chi­meras; but, he reasoned, for Dinis to have talked about some of these things, he must have come here and gone back, as it is as­cer­tained. So, he shouldn’t be afraid of liv­ing here forever. Calmed by this thought, he began to pay at­ten­tion to the works of the queen’s com­pan­ions; they were new fash­ions that were be­ing de­veloped, to come to this world and re­place the old ones.

The in­tro­duc­tion ce­re­mony happened in style. Titus trembled when rest­ing his lips on the soft, thin hand of the sov­er­eign. She did not seem to no­tice this, be­cause on the other hand she had a mir­ror, upon which she looked at her­self con­stantly.

The three of them were al­lowed to con­tinue the visit of the palace and pro­ceeded through the gal­ler­ies and rooms. Each room was filled with people, men or wo­men, some­times both, who were busy with dif­fer­ent du­ties they were in charge of by the law of the coun­try, or by ar­bit­rary or­der of the mon­arch. Titus walked through these dif­fer­ent rooms in as­ton­ish­ment, mar­vel­ling at what he saw, those oc­cu­pa­tions, those habits, those char­ac­ters. In one of the rooms, a group of one hun­dred people was busy knead­ing a light bloated white dough. Nat­ur­ally, this place must be the pantry, thought Titus, they are pre­par­ing some sin­gu­lar del­ic­acy for the king’s lunch. He asked the cicer­one if he was right, and the cicer­one answered:

“No, sir. These men are busy pre­par­ing brain dough for a cer­tain num­ber of men of all classes: states­men, po­ets, lov­ers, etc; it also serves wo­men. This dough is es­pe­cially for those who, on your planet, live with the true dis­pos­i­tions of our coun­try, to whom we present this con­stitutive ele­ment.”

“Is it a Chi­mer­ical mass?”

“From the best that has ever been made.”

“Can I see it?”

The cicer­one smiled, called the chief of the room, to whom he asked for some dough. He went to the ware­house and took a por­tion and handed it to Titus. As soon as the poet took it from the chief’s hands, the dough came apart, as if it had been made of smoke. Titus was con­fused, but the chief tapped him on the shoulder. “Re­lax,” he said. “We have raw ma­ter­ial at hand; it is from our own at­mo­sphere, and our at­mo­sphere doesn’t end.”

This chief had an in­sinu­at­ing face, but, like all Chi­mer­ic­als, he was bound to ab­strac­tions, so Titus couldn’t get one more word out of him, be­cause after say­ing his last words, he star­ted look­ing at the air, con­tem­plat­ing an in­sect in its flight.

This case at­trac­ted his col­leagues, who came to him and im­mersed them­selves in the con­tem­pla­tion of the winged in­sect.

The three con­tin­ued on their way.

Fur­ther on, there was a room where many Chi­mer­ic­als were around tables dis­cuss­ing the dif­fer­ent ways to in­spire the dip­lo­mats and dir­ect­ors of our world, the pre­texts to fill the time and ter­rify the spir­its with fu­til­it­ies and straw men. These men looked re­fined and smart. There was an or­der from the mon­arch for­bid­ding the en­trance into that room in work­ing hours and a guard was at the door. The shortest dis­trac­tion in that con­gress would be con­sidered a pub­lic calam­ity.

My poet walked from room to room, from gal­lery to gal­lery. Here, vis­it­ing a mu­seum; there, ana­lys­ing a work or a game; he had time to see everything, to ex­am­ine everything with at­ten­tion and de­tail. As he passed by the large gal­lery that ended in the square, he saw that people, gathered un­der the win­dows, were sur­round­ing the gal­lows. An ex­e­cu­tion was about to hap­pen. “A cap­ital crime?” asked Titus, who had our le­gis­la­tion in mind.

“No,” they answered him, “a crime of lèse-cour­toisie.” The con­victed was a Chi­mer­ical that had com­mit­ted the crime of not curtsy­ing in time and in a gra­cious man­ner. This crime is con­sidered the greatest pos­sible and ima­gin­able au­da­city in that coun­try. The Chi­mer­ical people con­tem­plated the ex­e­cu­tion as if they were watch­ing a thespian spec­tacle, amid ap­plause and joy­ful shouts.

How­ever, it was time for the royal lunch. At the table of the mon­arch Genius sat only the king, the queen, two min­is­ters, a doc­tor, and the charm­ing fairy who had taken my poet to those heights. The fairy, be­fore sit­ting at the table, begged the king to ad­mit Titus to the lunch. The an­swer was af­firm­at­ive and Titus took his seat. Lunch was much more brief and faster than one can ima­gine. It las­ted but a few seconds, after which every­one got up, and a table was opened for the roy­als’ game. Titus watched it: there were chairs around the room where Uto­pias and Chi­meras were seated; on the backs of these chairs were Chi­mer­ical no­ble­men, with their pea­cocks and their scar­let clothes. Titus took the op­por­tun­ity to know how those care­free girls knew him. He leaned against a chair and asked the Uto­pia there. She asked for per­mis­sion and after the usual form­al­it­ies, she re­tired to one of the rooms with the poet, and there she asked him:

“Do you really not know who we are? Don’t you know us?”

“I don’t know you. That is, I know you all now, and that makes me really re­gret­ful be­cause I wish I had known you longer.”

“Oh! Al­ways a poet!”

“You all truly are of un­ri­valled kind­ness. But where did you see me?”

“In your own home.”

“Oh!”

“Don’t you re­mem­ber? At night, tired of the daily struggles, you re­tire to your room, and there, open­ing sails to the mind, you let your­self go by a se­rene and calm sea. On that jour­ney some maid­ens ac­com­pany you... it’s us, the Uto­pias; us, the Chi­meras."

Titus un­der­stood some­thing that had been said to him a long time ago. He smiled, and lay­ing his beau­ti­ful and lov­ing eyes on the Uto­pia be­fore him, said: “Ah! It’s you, it’s true! A com­fort­ing com­pany that dis­tracts me from all the miser­ies and sor­rows. It is in your bosom that I wipe my tears. Thank­fully! It com­forts me to see you all in per­son and in a palp­able way. ”

“And do you want to know,” asked Uto­pia, “who takes us all to your com­pany? Look, see.”

The poet turned his head and saw the trav­el­ing vis­ion, his travel com­pan­ion.

 “Ah! it’s her!” said the poet.

“It’s true. It’s the blonde Fantasy, the un­veiled com­pan­ion of those who think and those who feel.”

The Fantasy and the Uto­pia in­ter­weaved their hands and looked at Titus. He looked at them both, as if elated. This las­ted a few seconds; the poet wanted to ask some ques­tions, but when he was about to speak, he no­ticed that the two had be­come thin­ner and steam­ier. He ar­tic­u­lated some­thing, but see­ing that they were be­com­ing more and more trans­par­ent, and dis­tin­guish­ing their fea­tures only a little, he let out these words: 

“So! What is this? Why do you fade away like this? ” More and more shad­ows dis­ap­peared and the poet ran to the game room. There, an identical spec­tacle awaited him; it was ter­ri­fy­ing. All the fig­ures were fad­ing away as if they were made of mist. Stunned and throb­bing, Titus walked through some gal­ler­ies and fi­nally came upon the square. All the ob­jects were un­der­go­ing the same trans­form­a­tion. Soon, Titus felt that he lacked foot sup­port and saw that he was loose in space.

In this situ­ation, he broke out in a pain­ful cry. He closed his eyes and let him­self go as if he had to find death as his jour­ney’s end.

It was ac­tu­ally very likely. After a few seconds, Titus opened his eyes and saw that he was fall­ing per­pen­dic­u­larly over a black spot that looked like the size of an egg. His body tore through space like light­ning. The black spot grew big­ger and big­ger un­til it be­came the size of a sphere. The poet’s fall had some­thing diabol­ical about it; once in a while he would let out a groan. The air against his eyes forced him to close them from time to time. Even­tu­ally, the black spot that grew kept grow­ing, un­til it looked like the Earth. 

“It’s the Earth!” said Titus.

I be­lieve there will be no hu­man words to ex­press the joy that that soul, lost in space, felt when it re­cog­nized that it was ap­proach­ing its home planet. The joy was cut short. Titus thought, and thought well, that at that speed when he touched the ground he would never get up again. He got the creeps: he saw death be­fore him and sur­rendered his soul to God. And so he went, or rather, he came and came, un­til — mir­acle of mir­acles! — he fell on a beach, stand­ing, firm as if he had not gone through that in­fernal leap.

When he saw him­self on land his first im­pres­sion was of sat­is­fac­tion. Then, he tried to see in what re­gion of the planet he was in; he could have fallen in Siberia or China, but he found him­self two steps from his place. The poet hur­ried back to his peace­ful home.

The candle had burned out; the mon­grel, ly­ing un­der the table, had her eyes fixed on the door. Titus entered and threw him­self on the bed, where he fell asleep, re­flect­ing on what had just happened.

Since then, Titus has a very sharp look, and can tell at first sight if a man has brains or Chi­mer­ical dough in his head. I must de­clare that he finds only a few that do not match the lat­ter spe­cies. He says, and I have reason to be­lieve, that I am among the very few ex­cep­tions. In spite of the con­temp­tu­ous ones against me, I can­not with­draw my trust from a man who has just made such a won­der­ful trip, and who was able to look dir­ectly at the shin­ing throne of the king of Trifles.
  
<br/>

***

<br/>**Joa­quim Maria Machado de As­sis**, born on 21 July 1839, is ar­gu­ably the most im­port­ant Brazilian au­thor of all times. He is con­sidered by North-Amer­ican critic Har­old Bloom as the most im­port­ant black au­thor of all times. He penned the ro­mances The Posthum­ous Mem­oirs of Brás Cu­bas and Dom Cas­murro, works that fig­ure amongst the most im­port­ant and in­flu­en­tial of Brazilian lit­er­at­ure. Dur­ing his ca­reer, Machado wrote sev­eral short stor­ies, and in many of them he flir­ted with fant­astic ele­ments, be­ing one of the earli­est Brazilian au­thors to ex­plore the genre.

The Land of Chi­meras is one of such stor­ies, full of ma­gic and fant­astic be­ings. It was first re­leased on Novem­ber 1st, 1862 and Eita! is proud to present its first ver­sion in Eng­lish.