---
layout: post
title:  "The Witch Dances"
date:   2021-04-02 13:03:00 -0300
categories: stories
author: Thiago Ambrosio Lage
excerpt: The Witch Dances, by Thiago Ambrosio Lage, the tale of a peculiar collaboration for dire times
featured-image: /assets/posts/image_witch.png
featured-image-alt: Someone casting a shadow on a house at night while someone peeks at the window, from the inside

---

_Five, six, seven, eight._

_One leg right._

_One leg left._

_Raise arms, half a pi­rou­ette._

_Kick the air with the left leg._

In the dis­tance, I see the end of the deser­ted street. I feel their eyes on me. Through the cracks and slits of the houses, they watch me. Fear, curi­os­ity, fas­cin­a­tion. A witch dances. The Witch dances. In a vil­lage such as this one, we need no names. The Witch, the Priest. I don’t see him, but I know he’s there, high up on the bell tower, watch­ing me. We thought about us­ing the bell to set my pace but de­cided against it. It could dis­turb the rhythm of the fae. The pace of the Priest was the re­pose. Exit the scene and let the oth­ers dance.

_Slap the right thigh._

_One more step, one more pi­rou­ette._

_Turn. Sigh._

_Bang the staff thrice on the ground._

I con­quer the dis­tance of a few more houses. In between strides I can hear whis­pers be­hind closed doors, their small cries. I feel their be­wil­der­ment. “Where is the Priest? How can he let her do this?” I am but a witch, but to them, I am the Witch who crossed a line today. I have al­ways had my du­ties, and the Priest had his. He had the an­swers for the mal­ad­ies of the soul; I had the cures for the mal­ad­ies of the body. Every­one sought my hut just out­side the vil­lage. They paid up­front. It was best to already leave a chicken, some eggs, a few yards of fab­ric or even some coins than hav­ing to re­turn to the Witch’s house. In ex­change, they were cleansed, and took home herbs, teas, con­coc­tions, charms.

_Re­peat from the top, thrice._

_Change the pace. Arm, arm._

_Aim with the staff, re­cite the rite._

_A wide step for­ward, a short step back._

I could have chosen a sim­pler dance, but it wouldn’t have been as ef­fect­ive. We had to de­feat the Vi­olet Ves­icle. My medi­cines weren’t enough, and I could tell by the fresh graves on the tiny cemetery be­hind the church that many vil­la­gers had already been taken. It was im­possible to dis­pel the dis­ease with the in­cant­a­tions and dances of a Witch, so I was left with the duty of fright­en­ing the vil­la­gers into their homes, where they’d watch me from a dis­tance. This was the only way to make sure that the fae, at their own pace, would visit them all.

_Wiggle, turn, re­peat, re­peat._

More houses conquered. Now only halfway to go.

_Left leg._

_Right leg._

_Cross and un­cross the arms. Squat._

Each faery car­ried two things: a vial and an imp. It was the little dev­ils’ duty to stab the vil­la­gers with a needle. To singe the needle, dip on the vial and stab. Singe, dip, stab. The vil­la­gers would only feel a sting, and upon not be­ing able to see the imp—made in­vis­ible by the craft of the fae—they would as­sume it was just a mos­quito. It had been hard to con­vince the Priest of the need for imps, but even if the fae could touch the iron needle, they lacked the fire to per­form the del­ic­ate pro­ced­ure. Hence, the tiny creatures were left with the mis­sion of dis­guising the imps and car­ry­ing the vial with the golden li­quid. Those were their steps in our cho­reo­graphy.

_Burst with a scream._

_Slap the left thigh._

_One more step, a back­wards pi­rou­ette._

_Turn. Sigh._

The Sci­ent­ist was the new­est res­id­ent of the vil­lage: he had come from the city, from the uni­ver­sity, claim­ing the air here would do him good. He had a small garden but he did not work the land like the Gardener. He was skilled with glass, metals, and wood but not like mas­ters Glass­maker, Smith and Car­penter. He was wise but un­like the Priest, he did not have all the an­swers. To tell the truth, he had more ques­tions than an­swers. Many of those ques­tions were dir­ec­ted at me, and he was the only vil­la­ger who wasn’t afraid. He came by my hut fre­quently, only to drink tea and talk. In one of those vis­its, when the dis­ease had already taken men, wo­men, chil­dren, and eld­ers without dis­tinc­tion, he brought to me the golden vial. My herbs and oint­ments ap­peased the fever and the pain, but I had already lost all hope of sav­ing the sick from the fate await­ing them be­hind the church. The golden medi­cine filled me with hope, but we had two prob­lems: it had to be ap­plied _be­fore_ the per­son fell ill, and it had to be done through the pinch of a needle. “It’ll be im­possible to con­vince people of this mad­ness”, I had said. He laughed and poin­ted at my hut and my glasses of dried herbs, say­ing that “im­possible” was the very thing I did every day.

That night, we made our plan.

_Turn the staff thrice. Re­peat._

_Re­peat everything three more times._

I spoke with a Fae prin­cess who thought the idea was de­light­ful. Be­sides, with so many deaths, the little of­fer­ings her people re­ceived were now bathed in tears, and every­body knows that fair­ies prefer sweet­ness over sa­vory. The Sci­ent­ist spoke with the Priest, whose pray­ers and mir­acles, he was re­luct­ant to ad­mit, were power­less against the dis­ease. A day and a night with no church bells and no mass: it was all we needed to open up the vil­lage to the forest people, the people of the depths, and I. The Sci­ent­ist and I had to work to­gether to get the help from the people of the depths. It took at least four hands in a ritual to sum­mon a prince of Hell to make such a re­quest. The Sci­ent­ist, that fool, hap­pily paid the price, giv­ing away some­thing he thought he didn’t have. Done deals, I now only needed to fin­ish my dance and trust my part­ners. Those of us who cared were in their place, per­form­ing their du­ties. Even the vil­la­gers, just by stay­ing at home. Soon the vil­lage would be rid of the dis­ease.

What about the Al­caide? Well... he is a moron who in­sists on smear­ing ur­ine and ma­nure on the wounds, and other things that only get in the way.

Every­one had their part and helped. Not him.